---
layout: default
title: DH Syllabus
nav_exclude: true
---

### Course logistics

**Classes**: Mondays and Wednesdays, 2:30-3:45PM, HLG 205.
**Instructor**: John Laudun, HLG 356, 482-5493, laudun@louisiana.edu.
Office hours: Mondays and Wednesdays, 9-11AM and by appointment.

### Course Description

In general, there is a cluster of issues that concern humanists: all of
them revolve around the production of cultural expressive forms and the
relationship between individual expression and the communities in which
these forms emerge. The digital humanities represent the merging of two
areas of activity that have run for a long time as distinct concerns:
humanities computing and the use and study of digital media — sometimes
known as new media. The digital humanities have the potential both to
develop new kinds of analyses and publications as well as to
re-invigorate present practices, and even to renew practices (e.g.,
indices) that have become disused in our current era. This course
surveys issues and activities in order to acquaint students with the
overall landscape of the digital humanities. We will, over the course of
the semester examine textual markup and its uses, databases and their
uses, approaches to visualization and distant reading, network theory,
and corpus methodologies. The course requires no prior knowledge of the
digital humanities, but it does assume familiarity with computers and
their standard uses (word processing, web browsing, etc.). Participants
engage in a number of exploratory activities and small projects, which
are intended to make it possible for them to choose a larger project on
which to work which suits their own interests and expertise as well as
the requirements suggested by the research itself — which is something
that the digital humanities can offer: matching the publication — text,
photo gallery, audio or video netcast — to the topic being considered.

### Course Texts and Other Accessories

The texts I plan(ned) to use for this seminar are below, but only buy
the first one. The Schriebman et al. text is expensive, and I am trying
to determine if there is an alternative.

#### Required

-   Moretti, Franco. 2007. *Maps, Graphs, and Trees*. Verso.
    (ISBN: 1844671852)
-   Schriebman, Siemens, Unsworth (ed). 2008. *A Companion to Digital
    Humanities*. Wiley-Blackwell. (ISBN: 1405168064). (An on-line
    version of the text is
    [available](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/).)

#### Recommended

-   Eric Raymond's [The Cathedral and the
    Bazaar](http://catb.org/~esr/writings/homesteading/cathedral-bazaar/cathedral-bazaar.ps) was,
    and is, an essential description, and somewhat of a manifesto, for
    open source software and thus of open, or community, source
    materials in general. The link is to the postscript of the document,
    which gives you the entire book in one link, but there is are [other
    versions available.](http://catb.org/~esr/writings/homesteading/)
-   Why open source might be interesting to a humanist might be more
    clearly articulated by [Lawrence
    Lessig](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_Culture_(book)) in *[Free
    Culture](http://www.free-culture.cc/)*. Lessig is a professor of law
    at Stanford University and a long-time advocate for a
    creative commons. (The book is also available in paperback in almost
    any bookstore as well as in an on-line HTML version.)

We will be reading a lot of e-texts. Participants must decide for
themselves how they want to interact with those documents -- remember
either to figure printing costs into the costs of the course and/or the
time required to print for free on campus in the various venues. (Be
aware of any printing restrictions.) We will also be using two web
applications/services, [Wordpress.com](http://wordpress.com/) and
[Dropbox.com](http://dropbox.com/), both of which offer better
experiences with some kind of broadband connection. A lot of the
software we will be using in the course of the seminar is open source.
That does not necessarily mean that it runs on any platform. In the lab
we have the advantage of machines that can boot both into Mac OS X,
which is a Unix, as well as Windows. If participants wish to use the
software elsewhere, they will need to calculate the cost, either
monetarily or in terms of time (and perhaps both), to set up their own
systems. In addition to these potential costs, there is also the matter
of portable storage. Media production, especially video, can take up
quite a bit of storage space. (One hour of compressed video takes up
about 5GB.) Participants interested in working with large resolution
image, audio, or video files will want to invest either in a very large
flash drive or in a modest external hard drive. The Macintosh Pros in
the lab support both USB and Firewire 800 devices.

### <span style="font-size: 15px; font-weight: bold;">Assignments and Grading</span>

This is an exploratory course *in* the digital humanities and *for* the
digital humanities at the university. As such it depends greatly upon
your **participation**, which includes your willingness to try a wide
variety of things out, some (or even many) of which may not appear to
you either at first glance or ever to have a meaningful outcome. To some
degree this uncertainty in meaning is a function of how new the “field”
of digital humanities is not only to you but also in the academy. For
example, I will require all of us, including me, to **free write** for
five minutes at the beginning of every seminar. I do so not only because
I think free writing is an important life skill, one useful far beyond
the immediate impact it may have on making you a productive scholar, but
also because we will, later in the course, need some data with which to
work. If nothing else, you will have a data set consisting of your free
writing. So that’s at least two activities upon which you will be
graded. In addition to these activities, I will ask you to write a
**pre- and a post-seminar essay** in which you describe what you know
and what you wish to know, as well as later what you learned, about the
digital humanities. Again, some of you will recognize this as the KWL
activity, and I offer it as something useful not only in your own work,
both in your scholarship and in your teaching, but also something useful
no matter what career your pursue. The larger assignment you have in
this course is an **essay/project** in which you try out some of the
ideas and methods we explore in the course of the seminar to a topic or
a body of content with which you are familiar. The essay should document
the methodology you used, the results you acquired, and how these
results relate to results of more traditional forms of scholarship.
(Remember, scholarship itself has undergone radical changes in the last
fifty years, and so we should never imagine in the course of this
seminar that we are working from a static base.)

-   Participation/free-writing: 70%
-   Essay/project: 30%

### Course Schedule

To make it easier to maintain and to reference, the course schedule is
[here](http://johnlaudun.wordpress.com/schedule/).
